INTRODUCTION
PATHOGENESIS 
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIOM 
DIAGNOSIS 
MANAGENT 
PROGNOSIS 


INTRODUCTION Polycythemia vera (PV) is a stem cell disorder characterized as a panhyperplastic, malignant, and neoplastic marrow disorder. Its most prominent feature is an elevated absolute red blood cell mass because of uncontrolled red blood cell production. This is accompanied by increased white blood cell (myeloid) and platelet (megakaryocytic) production

Polycythemia vera (PV) is a stem cell disorder characterized as a panhyperplastic, malignant, and neoplastic marrow disorder. Its most prominent feature is an elevated absolute red blood cell mass because of uncontrolled red blood cell production. This is accompanied by increased white blood cell (myeloid) and platelet (megakaryocytic) production

Polycythemia vera (PV) is a stem cell disorder characterized as a panhyperplastic, malignant, and neoplastic marrow disorder. Its most prominent feature is an elevated absolute red blood cell mass because of uncontrolled red blood cell production. This is accompanied by increased white blood cell (myeloid) and platelet (megakaryocytic) production

PATHOGENESIS The bone marrow of patients with polycythemia vera (PV),contains normal stem cells but also contains abnormal clonal stem cells that interfere with or suppress normal stem cell growth and maturation.

Progenitors of the blood cells in these patients display abnormal responses to growth factors, suggesting the presence of a defect in a signaling pathway common to different growth factors. 

A mutation of the Janus kinase–2 gene (JAK2) is the most likely source of PV pathogenesis, as JAK2 is directly involved in the intracellular signaling following exposure to cytokines to which PV progenitor cells display hypersensitivity

Nonclonal polycythemia diagnosed when polycythemia is caused by a physiologic process that is not derived from a single cell. Nonclonal polycythemia can be congenital or acquired (secondary).

Congenital Polycythemia 
Lifelong or familial polycythemia should trigger a search for a congenital problem. These inherited conditions may be transmitted as dominant or recessive disorders. 

Autosomal dominant causes include hemoglobins that have increased oxygen affinity erythropoietin receptor mutations resulting in an enhanced effect of erythropoietin or mutations in the von Hippel–Lindau gene that result in altered intracellular oxygen sensing. Another rare cause is autosomal recessive 2,3-ddiphosphoglyceric acid deficiency, which leads to a left shift of the oxygen dissociation curve, increased oxygen affinity, and consequent polycythemia.

Acquired Polycythemia Polycythemia may be present in clinical situations associated with chronic arterial oxygen desaturation. Cardiovascular defects involving right-to-left shunts and pulmonary diseases interfering with proper oxygenation are the most common causes of hypoxic polycythemia.Clinical findings usually include cyanosis, hyperemia of the sclerae and mucous membranes, and clubbing of the fingers.Living at high altitudes also causes hypoxic polycythemia

Clinical Manifestations  Patients with polycythemia vera usually have hepatosplenomegaly. Erythrocytosis may cause hypertension, headache, shortness of breath, or neurologic symptoms and increases the risk of th BBC rombosis. Granulocytosis may cause diarrhea or pruritus from histamine release Thrombocytosis (with or without platelet dysfunction) may cause thrombosis or hemorrhage. 

DIAGNOSIS 

TREATMENT Phlebotomy – To keep hematocrit below 45%

 Aspirin – 81 mg daily

Cytoreductive therapy – For patients at high risk for thrombosis

Splenectomy in patients with painful splenomegaly or repeated episodes of splenic infarction

PROGNOSIS Median survival in patients with polycythemia vera (PV), which is 1.5-3 years in the absence of therapy, has been extended to approximately 14 years overall, and to 24 years for patients younger than 60 years of age, because of new therapeutic tools.

 Five-year survival in the overall cohort was 79.5% but patients are at a high risk of second primary malignancies and leukemic transformation, which may compromise long-term survival

CONCLUSION IT IS A RELATIVELY RARE DISEASE IN OUR ENVIRONMENT BUT CAN BE SEEN SECONDARY TO OTHER CONDITIONS. 

REGULAR PCV CHECK IS ESSENTIAL FOR ALL PATIENT AND INDIVIDUALS.

REFERENCES:NELSON TEXTBOOK OF PEDIATRICS 

emedicine.medscape.com/article